# GB energy markets explained (briefly-ish)

The below will be an oversimplification of energy markets in GB but will capture the important points to get an intuitive picture and inform power trading.

***Energy is provided from generators to suppliers to consumers.*** So energy contracts are also exchanged between these parties guarenteeing the flow of energy. We will discuss markets which are designed to bring together *generators* and *suppliers* i.e. the *purchasing of wholesale energy*. It is within these markest that we wish to trade. We are not interested in the sale of energy from suppliers to consumers which is not directly speculated on.

When it comes to energy trading the trading is done through the sale and purchase of these energy contracts. Unlike in pure financial markets, there are additional risks for energy traders coming in the form of costs associated with imbalanced positions (e.g. a trader in a postion of power excess or deficit as reflected in the contracts held). One way to mitigate these risks is to be an *asset-backed trader which has the ability to actually provide/use the energy that underlies the contract*. If a trader is not asset-backed an *imbalanced position will require balancing by the system operator possibly at a premium cost to the trader*. Even asset-backed traders must sometimes must be rebalanced if forcecasted generation/demand does not match actual generation/demand and so the contracts they hold may not be fufillable. This balancing is done in a separate market call the *balancing mechanism* and occurs just before the settlement period (when the power is actually provided).

***Currently there is a single bidding zone for the GB wholesale energy markets and prices are uniform accross GB.*** There is an alternative zonal pricing model where prices are independently determined in various zones based on local supply and demand.

Despite being geographically a single market, there are still ***multiple markets for contracts exchaged on separated timescales***. Namely, there are various different markets/protocols for buying or selling power contracts with the same settlement period but distinguished by how far in advance the contract is made. The day-ahead market is one such market. 

Before describing the day-ahead market which will be our focus, first we note that generators and suppliers can engage in longer term contracts (with a lifetime greater than a single day) to provide power at a given price on a given date. These may be custom forward contracts made bilaterally or standardised exchange-traded energy futures with a timescale greater than a single day ahead. The purpose of such contracts is to cover in advance the baseload and minimum peak power demand to mitigate the significant portion of risk coming of (hugely) imbalanced positions.

On top of these contracts there is then a need to 'shape' the demand/supply balance closer to the time the power is provided. This is the purpose of the day-ahead and intraday markets. The day-ahead market is important for two reasons: 1. the market is close enough to the provision of power that demand and supply can be forecasted accurately and prices will reflect these underlying fundamentals while 2. the market is not too close to the settlement period that almost all of the demand and supply has been matched already. This means there is still significant available liquidity in the day-ahead market and most trades can be met and that most traders are price takers (i.e. typical individiual trades are small compare to the total traded volume). On the other hand, the intraday markets, which enable participants to modify their position closer to gate closure, often suffer from low liquidity, meaning that it is difficult for participants to find counter-parties to trade with.

## Day-ahead markets

Day-ahead markets are typically double-blind auctions into which generators and consumers submit anonymous trades. These trades are either: an offer to generate a certain amount of power at a given price or a bid to consume a certain amount of power at a given price volumes of energy at a price they are willing to pay or be paid. Supply and demand are compared accross the auction and a market clearing price is calculated for each period of the following day. This one price is applied to all accepted bids (those willing to pay at least than the clearing price) and all accepted offers (those will to recieve the clearing price or less). The clearing price is the agreed price such that volume of accepted bids equals the volume of accepted offers and so every trade is matched on the exchange.

In GB their are two sequential day-ahead auctions, one in the morning and one in the afternoon. In these auctions traders place a portfolio of trades one for each of the 24 hourly periods of the following day (the second auction has the option to also place trades at a half-hourly resolution). The idea being that between these auctions the forecasts of generators and suppliers improve and they may wish to fine tune their position via the second auction before entering the balancing mechanism.

Generally a generator/supplier puts in offers/bids that are limited by the respective marginal cost/value of producing/supplying energy. A wind generator may place offers which are close to 0 GBP/MWh since its marginal costs are very low and may even be negative since the generator is receiving a subsidy in the form of a contract for difference. They recieve a subsidy CfD such that they receive at least a guarenteed strike price for their generation. Typically such generators are not setting the clearing price since they are low down in the merit order, they do not need to forecast the clearing price in order to place their offers. The generators which do need to forecast the clearing price are those that believe they may be the price setter and are in competition with each other near the bottom of the merit order. These generators have higher marginal costs set by fuel costs e.g. gas fired power plants. They need to place offers which are below the clearing price in order to be accepted, this may be just above their marginal cost or at times of scarce renewable energy far above their marginal cost. Predicting these fluctutions of the clearing price is important for these dispatchable generators to be able to cash in on 'scarcity rent' in the market.

At times of high wind and solar generation the clearing price of wholesale energy can drop to zero or even be negative, since the marginal cost of these generators is very low. For regulatory reasons when the clearing price is negative the renewable generators who hold contracts for difference are not allowed to cash in this contract and so they do not recieve the strike price.

A non-asset backed trader can trade between the two day-ahead auctions, i.e. selling to buy or buying to sell, for the underlying energy provided in the a single settlement period. In this case the trader must predict the clearing price in each auction in order to ascertain which strategy to follow and their expected revenue.

## Balancing Mechanism

As mentioned, generators and suppliers must forecast their energy flows in advance in order to place accurate bids/offers for energy contracts to receive payment on said flows. It is common for these forecasts to not quite be right and so the trader may end up being in an imbalanced position after the day ahead (and intraday) auctions. These imbalanced traders then entering the balancing mechansim run by NESO to ensure that the come gate closure that supply and demand are matched. The balancing mechanism also allows NESO to maintain other services which are crucial for the flow of power: such as maintaining frequency of the AC current and voltage on the network. These additional services mean that the balancing mechanism is more complicated than just a very short term auction. That said a masic component of the balancing mechanism is a pay-as-bid auction for the last elements of supply and demand. Here the auciton is pay-as-bid meaning that, in theory, a battery, for example, which places an offer to discharge at price X will be accepted in a price merit order for as long as there is excess demand on the system. For this service the battery recieves its offer price X. That said because the balancing mechanism is not just a simple auction and actually hosts assets providing other services it is often the case that said battery will be 'skipped' in favour of a higher cost generator which is able to provide and ancilliary service to the grid e.g. a costly gas power plant may continue to generate in that period in order to maintain frequency/voltage. This power plant still provides power and so affects the supply/demand balance of the balancing mechanism. The battery may even be called upon to charge since the gas power plant may overshoot. Never-the-less, the cost of all these balancing actions taken ad-hoc by NESO are democratised (averaged) and passed onto the actual originally imbalanced generators/suppliers who then receive/pay a so called system price.

At times when the Net Imbalance Volume (NIV) is high i.e. there is a power deficit on the network (short) then the system price will be higher than the clearing price since costlier generators (possibly offering ancilliary services) which were not accepted during market clearing will be called upon. When the system is long (power excess) the system price will be low in order to attract frugal suppliers in what will be a 'buyers market'. 

For an energy trader in the day-ahead market, asset backed or otherwise, the system price represents a risk and an opportunity. An imbalanced trader is exposed to this system price, there is a risk in being long in a long market and being forced to sell energy at a lower price. Or being short in short market and being forced to purchase energy at a premium, this case is particularly bad since in general price swings to the upside tend to be more volatile. This is true of most commodities and is similarly true of energy. However, traders can also position themeselves favourably: for example by being long in a short market i.e. withholding uncontracted energy in order to sell it last minute at a premium or by being short in long market i.e. betting that the system price will be low and buying up that cheap energy last minute to meet lucrative contracts held previously.

We have outlined some of the features of energy markets in GB focusing on day-ahead auctions and balancing mechanisms. Thsi repo will begin to model forecasting and stretegies in such markets.




